README.md, before:

#Altrino Due#
Author: Feldenthorne
- - -
###Description###

This is the source code for an alternative build environment for the Arduino Due. The project 
stemmed from a the need for a more robust development environment for the Arduino
Due than could be (easily) managed within the confines of the Arduino IDE and it's weird
"throw everything in a base folder to compile" approach.

To put a few details to this setup, it:

* Relies on a modified standard Makefile from the [Atmel Software Framework]
(http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx) (ASF)
* Incorporates many ASF features into a system library (timers, UART, GPIO, etcetera)
* __Requires__ the user to install BOSSA and gcc-arm-none-eabi

###Current Capabilities###

Currently, this project builds a slightly modified "Getting Started" example from the
Atmel Software Framework source for the Arduino Due, just to give the user an idea of how 
things work.

- - -

##Downloading Source##

In order to download the source, which is maintained with the aid of the version-control 
software Git, it is necessary to download a Git or Subversion client. (It's actually not 
_entirely_ necessary, but highly suggested for retrieving updates. If you're put off by 
installing one more piece of software, you can download a tarball of the most recent release.)

When you have your desired client, follow the general procedure for Git or Subversion checkouts

    Repository URL: 	https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due
    Git: 				git clone https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due.git
    Subversion: 		svn checkout https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due

Additionally, when using Subversion, the checked out folder will open directly to the checkout 
folder if the "append source URL name to subfolder" option is disabled upon checkout. This is 
often an option on the Checkout window in a GUI or by specifying the folder path explicitly 
during a command line checkout. 
- - -

##How to Build##

In order to build anything using this framework, it is necessary to download and install two
pieces of software: an ARM-based compiler and a program to upload compiled programs to the Due.
A third required download is the Atmel Software Framework, which only needs to be unzipped and
placed in the lib directory in a folder called ASF.

###Compiler###

The compiler required is arm-none-eabi-gcc, which is a bare-metal (no particular OS) compiler. 
There multitudinous options for installing it, so you should pick one suitable to your needs. 
This project was originally developed on a Linux-based system, however, and this terminal-based 
install method worked for the author:

 * First, grab your dependencies

		sudo apt-get install python-serial python-argparse openocd \
    	flex bison libncurses5-dev autoconf texinfo build-essential \
    	libftdi-dev libtool zlib1g-dev genromfs git-core wget
    
 * If you're on a 64-bit system, grab

		sudo apt-get install ia32-libs

 * If that throws errors, either: 
 	* download the 32-bit packages individually

			sudo apt-get install libc6:i386 libgcc1:i386 gcc-4.6-base:i386 libstdc++5:i386 libstdc++6:i386

 	* Or add this entry to your Software Sources: 

			deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/ raring main restricted universe   multiverse

 * Download, unzip, and install the toolchain (this takes a while!)

		cd ~
		wget https://launchpad.net/gcc-arm-embedded/4.8/4.8-2014-q1-update/+download/gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_8-2014q1-20140314-linux.tar.bz2
		tar -jxf gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_8-2014q1-20140314-linux.tar.bz2
		exportline="export PATH=$HOME/gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_7-2014q2/bin:\$PATH"
		if grep -Fxq "$exportline" ~/.profile; then echo nothing to do ; else echo $exportline >> ~/.profile; fi
		. ~/.profile

The above setup method is a slightly condensed version of the explanation given by
[pixhawk.org](http://pixhawk.org/dev/toolchain_installation_lin) with a little extra thrown in.

	
###BOSSA###

[BOSSA](http://www.shumatech.com/web/products/bossa) is an open-source alternative to Atmel's 
proprietary BIN file uploader for their ARM processors - and it's the one that the Arduino 
IDE uses, if you're interested. Needless to say, it's necessary to install it to upload any 
programs to your Due using this environment.

If you're using a Debian/Ubuntu distribution, you can download "bossac" using
	sudo apt-get install bossac

Otherwise, you can download the binaries for your particular system on their [SourceForge
page](http://sourceforge.net/projects/b-o-s-s-a/files/).

###Atmel Software Framework###

The [Atmel Software Framework](http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx) is 
Atmel's proprietary framework software for their  microcontrollers. This build 
environment piggybacks on the ASF because there was no real reason to rewrite the drivers 
or memory management routines that Atmel provides.

It needs to be downloaded only because the file is an absolute __behemoth__ unzipped, 
weighing in at about 1.5 GB. The download itself 
[can be found on the bottom of this page]
(http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx), but you do need to register on 
Atmel's site to access it. I'm sure there's a mirror up somewhere that doesn't require 
registering, but it's a pretty painless process to register - plus you can sign up for 
email updates, if you're interested.

###Using the Makefile###

Building using the provided Makefile is pretty simplistic: navigate to the project's
source directory in a command prompt or terminal window and type

	make

For added convenience, the Makefile also supports:

	make clean		Cleans up compiled and temp files
	make lib		Builds the library file
	make install	Builds the project file and uploads it to your Due using bossac

- - -

##Building Documentation##

Documentation will be added in a future release, but it will eventually be buildable with 
the command

	make doc

Commit message:

Added in 'make putty' to pop up a configured serial terminal

README.md, after:

#Altrino Due#
Author: Feldenthorne
- - -
###Description###

This is the source code for an alternative build environment for the Arduino Due. The project 
stemmed from a the need for a more robust development environment for the Arduino
Due than could be (easily) managed within the confines of the Arduino IDE and its weird
"throw everything in a base folder to compile" approach.

To put a few details to this setup, it:

* Relies on a modified standard Makefile from the [Atmel Software Framework]
(http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx) (ASF)
* Incorporates many ASF features into a system library (timers, UART, GPIO, etcetera)
* __Requires__ the user to install BOSSA and gcc-arm-none-eabi

Basically, this build environment should allow you to use all the functions defined
for the Arduino Due in the ASF, as well as incorporate FreeRTOS into your project fairly
easily.

###Current Capabilities###

Currently, this project builds a slightly modified "Getting Started" example from the
Atmel Software Framework source for the Arduino Due, just to give the user an idea of how 
things work.

- - -

##Downloading Source##

In order to download the source, which is maintained with the aid of the version-control 
software Git, it is necessary to download a Git or Subversion client. (It's actually not 
_entirely_ necessary, but highly suggested for retrieving updates. If you're put off by 
installing one more piece of software, you can download a tarball of the most recent release.)

When you have your desired client, follow the general procedure for Git or Subversion checkouts

    Repository URL: 	https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due
    Git: 				git clone https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due.git
    Subversion: 		svn checkout https://github.com/feldenthorne/altrino-due

Additionally, when using Subversion, the checked out folder will open directly to the checkout 
folder if the "append source URL name to subfolder" option is disabled upon checkout. This is 
often an option on the Checkout window in a GUI or by specifying the folder path explicitly 
during a command line checkout. 
- - -

##How to Build##

In order to build anything using this framework, it is necessary to download and install two
pieces of software: an ARM-based compiler and a program to upload compiled programs to the Due.
A third required download is the Atmel Software Framework, which only needs to be unzipped and
placed in the lib directory in a folder called ASF.

###Compiler###

The compiler required is arm-none-eabi-gcc, which is a bare-metal (no particular OS) compiler. 
There multitudinous options for installing it, so you should pick one suitable to your needs. 
This project was originally developed on a Linux-based system, however, and this terminal-based 
install method worked for the author:

 * First, grab your dependencies

		sudo apt-get install python-serial python-argparse openocd \
    	flex bison libncurses5-dev autoconf texinfo build-essential \
    	libftdi-dev libtool zlib1g-dev genromfs git-core wget
    
 * If you're on a 64-bit system, grab

		sudo apt-get install ia32-libs

 * If that throws errors, either: 
 	* download the 32-bit packages individually

			sudo apt-get install libc6:i386 libgcc1:i386 gcc-4.6-base:i386 libstdc++5:i386 libstdc++6:i386

 	* Or add this entry to your Software Sources: 

			deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/ raring main restricted universe   multiverse

 * Download, unzip, and install the toolchain (this takes a while!)

		cd ~
		wget https://launchpad.net/gcc-arm-embedded/4.8/4.8-2014-q1-update/+download/gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_8-2014q1-20140314-linux.tar.bz2
		tar -jxf gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_8-2014q1-20140314-linux.tar.bz2
		exportline="export PATH=$HOME/gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_7-2014q2/bin:\$PATH"
		if grep -Fxq "$exportline" ~/.profile; then echo nothing to do ; else echo $exportline >> ~/.profile; fi
		. ~/.profile

The above setup method is a slightly condensed version of the explanation given by
[pixhawk.org](http://pixhawk.org/dev/toolchain_installation_lin) with a little extra thrown in.

	
###BOSSA###

[BOSSA](http://www.shumatech.com/web/products/bossa) is an open-source alternative to Atmel's 
proprietary BIN file uploader for their ARM processors - and it's the one that the Arduino 
IDE uses, if you're interested. Needless to say, it's necessary to install it to upload any 
programs to your Due using this environment.

If you're using a Debian/Ubuntu distribution, you can download "bossac" using
	sudo apt-get install bossac

Otherwise, you can download the binaries for your particular system on their [SourceForge
page](http://sourceforge.net/projects/b-o-s-s-a/files/).

###Atmel Software Framework###

The [Atmel Software Framework](http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx) is 
Atmel's proprietary framework software for their  microcontrollers. This build 
environment piggybacks on the ASF because there was no real reason to rewrite the drivers 
or memory management routines that Atmel provides.

It needs to be downloaded only because the file is an absolute __behemoth__ unzipped, 
weighing in at about 1.5 GB. The download itself 
[can be found on the bottom of this page]
(http://www.atmel.com/tools/avrsoftwareframework.aspx), but you do need to register on 
Atmel's site to access it. I'm sure there's a mirror up somewhere that doesn't require 
registering, but it's a pretty painless process to register - plus you can sign up for 
email updates, if you're interested.

###Using the Makefile###

Building using the provided Makefile is pretty simplistic: navigate to the project's
source directory in a command prompt or terminal window and type

	make

For added convenience, the Makefile also supports:

	make clean			Cleans up compiled and temp files
	make lib			Builds the library file
	make install		Builds the project file and uploads it to your Due using bossac
	make putty			Opens a PuTTY terminal to view serial output

- - -

##Building Documentation##

Documentation will be added in a future release, but it will eventually be buildable with 
the command

	make doc
